Feat(gateway): OTEL plugin enhancements (#3660)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_how-tos/send-otel-data-to-grafana-cloud.md

related_resources:
  - text: Collect metrics, logs, and traces with the OpenTelemetry plugin
    url: /how-to/collect-metrics-logs-and-traces-with-opentelemetry/

tags:
  - analytics
  - monitoring

prereqs:
  entities:
    services:
        - example-service
    routes:
        - example-route
  gateway:
    - name: KONG_TRACING_INSTRUMENTATIONS
      value: all
    - name: KONG_TRACING_SAMPLING_RATE
      value: 1.0
  konnect:
    - name: KONG_TRACING_INSTRUMENTATIONS
      value: all
    - name: KONG_TRACING_SAMPLING_RATE
      value: 1.0
  inline:
    - title: Grafana Cloud
      content: |
        This tutorial requires a Grafana Cloud account. You can create an account with a free trial at [https://grafana.com/products/cloud/](https://grafana.com/products/cloud/).
      icon: assets/icons/third-party/grafana.svg

cleanup:
  inline:
    - title: Clean up Konnect environment
      include_content: cleanup/platform/konnect
      icon_url: /assets/icons/gateway.svg
    - title: Destroy the {{site.base_gateway}} container
      include_content: cleanup/products/gateway
      icon_url: /assets/icons/gateway.svg
---

## Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector integration in Grafana

> We need to add a connection to OpenTelemetry in Grafana to generate the configuration we'll need. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to add a connection to OpenTelemetry in Grafana to generate the configuration we need. 
```

There are multiple ways to do this, but in this example, we'll use the OpenTelemetry Collector.

1. Log in to Grafana and launch your Grafana Cloud stack.
1. In the sidebar, click **Connections** > **Add new connection**.
1. Click **OpenTelemetry Collector**.
1. In the **Access Policy token name** enter a name for the token, "kong-otel" for example.
1. Click **Create token**.

   Grafana provides configuration, but we'll only use part of it.
   Export the values under `extensions.basicauth/grafana_cloud.client_auth` to your environment:

   ```sh
   export GRAFANA_USERNAME='username value'
   export GRAFANA_PASSWORD='password value'
   ```

   Then export the URL under `exporters.otlphttp/grafana_cloud.endpoint`:

   ```sh
   export GRAFANA_ENDPOINT='endpoint value'
   ```

> 1. In a terminal, create a configuration file for OpenTelemetry Collector:

Author: For some reason I had an issue when I did that, I think because of the variables, but the nano thing worked

1. In your terminal, export the following environment variables:
   ```sh
   export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME='kong-dev'
   export OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES='deployment.environment=production'
   export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT='http://localhost:4318'
   export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL='http/protobuf'
   ```

## Deploy OpenTelemetry Collector

Now that we have the OpenTelemetry Collector configuration, we can deploy it. We'll use the [`opentelemetry-collector-contrib`](https://hub.docker.com/r/otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib) image and apply the configuration and environment variables that we defined in the previous step:

```sh
docker run \
    -p 4318:4318 \
    -e OTEL_SERVICE_NAME \
    -e OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES \
    -e OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT \
    -e OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL \
    -e GRAFANA_USERNAME \
    -e GRAFANA_PASSWORD \
    -e GRAFANA_ENDPOINT \
    -v $(pwd)/otel-config.yaml:/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml \
    otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.141.0
```

You should already see some data in the terminal, however, this data will not be sent to Grafana since it doesn't use the `kong-dev` service name.

> In a new terminal, export the OTEL Collector host. In this example, use the following host:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a new terminal, export the OTEL Collector host:
```

Didn't think the rest was needed. Up to you though

```sh
export DECK_OTEL_HOST=host.docker.internal
```

## Enable the OpenTelemetry plugin

> In this tutorial, we'll configure the [OpenTelemetry plugin](/plugins/opentelemetry/) to send {{site.base_gateway}} metrics, traces, and logs to Grafana via OpenTelemetry Collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's configure the [OpenTelemetry plugin](/plugins/opentelemetry/) to send {{site.base_gateway}} metrics, traces, and logs to Grafana using the OpenTelemetry Collector.
```

  - name: opentelemetry
    config:
      traces_endpoint: "http://${otel-host}:4318/v1/traces"
      access_logs_endpoint: "http://${otel-host}:4318/v1/logs"
      logs_endpoint: "http://${otel-host}:4318/v1/logs"
      metrics:
        endpoint: "http://${otel-host}:4318/v1/metrics"
      resource_attributes:
        service.name: "kong-dev"

variables:
  otel-host:
    value: $OTEL_HOST
{% endentity_examples %}

{:.info}
> The `config.resource_attributes.service.name` value should be the same as the service name defined in Grafana Cloud.

## Validate the connection between OpenTelemetry Collector and Grafana

Send a `POST` request to generate traffic that we can use to validate that OpenTelemetry Collector is receiving the telemetry data:

{% validation request-check %}
url: /anything
status_code: 201
method: POST
headers:
    - 'Accept: application/json'
    - 'Content-Type: application/json'
{% endvalidation %}

You should see data in your OpenTelemetry Collector terminal.

Now go back to the OTEL collector configuration in Grafana Cloud and click **Test connection**. You should see the following message:

```sh
Traces are being ingested properly
```
{:.no-copy-code}

> ## Validate that Grafana is receiving {{site.base_gateway}} data

Reviewer: This step didn't work as expected for me, while I did see Metrics / Logs / Traces, I didn't see Prometheus / Loki / Tempo anywhere

## Validate the connection between OpenTelemetry Collector and Grafana

Send a `POST` request to generate traffic that we can use to validate that OpenTelemetry Collector is receiving the telemetry data:

{% validation request-check %}
url: /anything
status_code: 201
method: POST
headers:
    - 'Accept: application/json'
    - 'Content-Type: application/json'
{% endvalidation %}

You should see data in your OpenTelemetry Collector terminal.

Now, go back to the OTEL collector configuration in Grafana Cloud and click **Test connection**. You should see the following message:

```sh
Traces are being ingested properly
```
{:.no-copy-code}

## Validate that Grafana is receiving {{site.base_gateway}} data

1. In the sidebar, click **Drilldown**.
1. Click the signal you want to see:
  * **Metrics**
  * **Logs**
  * **Traces**

If you don't see your data, check that:
1. You're viewing the correct data source. In the **Data source** dropdown list, select:
   * `grafanacloud-<stack-name>-prom` for metrics
   * `grafanacloud-<stack-name>-logs` for logs
   * `grafanacloud-<stack-name>-traces` for traces

> 1. You're viewing the correct time range 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You're viewing the correct time range. 
```
